---
id: 2409
author: Benjamin J. Balter
date: 2012-04-13 19:31:35
date_gmt: 0000-00-00 00:00:00
title: >
  Blurring the Divide Between Citizen and
  Government
excerpt:
status: draft
comment_status: open
ping_status: open
password:
name:
to_ping:
pinged:
modified: 2012-04-13 19:31:36
modified_gmt: 2012-04-13 23:31:36
content_filtered:
parent: 0
guid: http://ben.balter.com/?p=2409
menu_order: 0
type: post
mime_type:
comment_count: 0
ancestors: [ ]
filter: raw
layout: post
category:
  - Uncategorized
post_tag: [ ]
post_format: [ ]
---
Once upon a time, if you wanted to participate in the policymaking process, you did so *occasionally* and *formally*. In a regulatory context, for example, an agency would put out a notice of proposed rulemaking, and members of the public (typically those with access to a highly-specialized subset of lawyers with administrative law experience) would have the opportunity to submit page upon page of legalese as to why the rule making should fall one way or the other. It was an arms-length relationship, one way, and a step removed from the policy itself. Fast forward a bit further, and we start seeing ideation platforms like ideascale and challenge.gov pop up. The interaction is informal (there aren’t lawyers involved), and although still generally a one-way communication, there’s an interactive component there. The prioritization of suggestions (generally a decision within the agency’s sole prerogative under an notice-and-comment model) is crowd sourced by allowing users to vote contributions up and down as they see fit. That’s great progress, but government hasn’t quite caught up with technology yet. There’s a lot more there. There’s the opportunity to make those contributions *frequent* and *informal*. There’s collaboration. <a class="simple-footnote" title="Government is most commonly thought of within a &#8220;me versus them&#8221; mentality. I&#8217;m a citizen, they&#8217;re my government. Yet, without going too far off the philosophical deep end, that&#8217;s a false dichotomy. Government exists solely at the service of its citizenry. It&#8217;s not &#8220;me versus them,&#8221; it&#8217;s &#8220;me versus we.&#8221; Think of it as an analogous distinction between one&#8217;s relationship to the now-defunct Encyclopedia Britannica, and the collaboratively edited Wikipedia. If I&#8217;m a subject-matter expert and find a mistake in Britanica, I blame them. They should know better. If I find that same mistake on Wikipedia, I correct it. We do know better. Government&#8217;s the same way. We&#8217;re all in that together." id="return-note-2020-1" href="#note-2020-1"><sup>1</sup></a>

So what does that mean practically? Let’s think in terms of code, as that’s what I know best.

Donation?

Lic. under GPL, etc.

But the idea isn’t limited just to code. Imagine if we wikified government websites, introducing a collaborative layer on top of already-rich government information.

<div class="simple-footnotes">
  <p class="notes">
    Notes:
  </p>
  
  <ol>
    <li id="note-2020-1">
      Government is most commonly thought of within a “me versus them” mentality. I’m a citizen, they’re my government. Yet, without going too far off the philosophical deep end, that’s a false dichotomy. Government exists solely at the service of its citizenry. It’s not “me versus them,” it’s “me versus we.” Think of it as an analogous distinction between one’s relationship to the now-defunct Encyclopedia Britannica, and the collaboratively edited Wikipedia. If I’m a subject-matter expert and find a mistake in Britanica, I blame them. They should know better. If I find that same mistake on Wikipedia, I correct it. We do know better. Government’s the same way. We’re all in that together. <a href="#return-note-2020-1">↩</a>
    </li>
  </ol>
</div>