---
title: "The myth of government IT"
excerpt: "When it comes to innovation in government, there's the law, and then there's the myth that surrounds it, a myth used to place never-ending bureaucratic obstacles in front of those who champion change."
---

When it comes to innovation in government, there's the law, and then there's the myth that surrounds it. More often than not, that myth serves not to further insulate the agency from potential threats to its infrastructure or mission, but instead, that myth is too often wielded to place never-ending bureaucratic obstacles in front of those who champion change. Much of that myth stems from decade-old superstitions around what policymakers view as the level of risk inherent with various technologies or methodologies.

Today, there's a mainframe-sized chasm between the basic assumptions that the private sector makes about software development, and the ones that government makes. Ten years ago, building an app in Ruby on Rails would have been a risky proposition given the framework's maturity, while something like ColdFusion would have been a safe, enterprise-grade bet. Today, the exact opposite is the case, at least for organizations outside the Beltway.

You'd be hard pressed to find a private-sector firm today worth its venture-capital investment that isn't built on open source software or that doesn't at least have a keen understanding of the unmatched value created by their development teams working more openly. That's far from the case in government. Even if you're able to strip away those anachronistic technical assumptions, there are still vast educational, organizational, and cultural hurdles for an agency to overcome before they can even think about their first commit.

In government, there's the law, and then there's the much larger myth that surrounds it. Just because something has been done a certain way, doesn't mean that it must be done that way, or that that's the only way to do it. Greg Godbout from 18f put it best when he said ["*there's a tendency to think that your habit is a policy or a law.*"](http://fcw.com/Articles/2014/08/22/18F-Greg-Godbout-Hacking-Bureaucracy.aspx?m=1&Page=2) It's not malicious, but given the demographics of government IT, new ideas like cloud or open source, can feel both personally and professionally threatening. To take an example from just a few years ago, the government employee who spent a decade securing funding and growing an agency datacenter, may not immediately see what role they can personally play in a world where their agency is in the cloud.

At each agency the most valuable tool to combat that FUD — fear, uncertainty, and doubt — is not to ask "may I", but rather, to get directly to the ground truth of what exactly needs to be done to get relevant stakeholders to "yes". *Using X service is going to violate agency policy? Do you have a copy of that policy I can read? Can you give me a checklist of everything we need to do to be in compliance with that policy, and who we can talk to about getting that policy changed?*

Government is often accused of harboring a CYA culture. Trying what's perceived as new and risky may land you in hot water, but absent the profit motive found in the private sector to offset that risk, there's little incentive to do anything other than what's already been done. As a result, you see two things:

First, [bureaucrats with the agency's immune system](http://ben.balter.com/2014/03/21/want-to-innovate-in-government-focus-on-culture/#bureaucracy-is-an-organism) have an incentive to create additional hoops for your app to jump through. After all, there's no harm (we don't have a cost/benefit or return on investment analysis to rely on), and if that hoop isn't jumped through, it can come back to haunt me if things go south.

Second, there's a strong pack mentality. If you can point to someone else that's done it, someone you want to be like, that's often your best argument. The White House and CIA uses X? I guess it's good enough for us then. It's the Sinatra argument. If you can make it there, you can make it anywhere. High visibility, quick wins can give technologists the political air cover they need to get to yes.

Has the needle moved? I'd say so. Pointing a naysayer to the 800+ government organizations on https://government.github.com/community is one of the best arguments change agents can ask for.
