---
title: "Why FedRAMP actually makes it harder for government agencies to move to the cloud"
layout: post
comments: true
excerpt: "The government's new FedRAMP requirements — intended to make it easier for federal agencies to make the jump to the cloud — actually make it significantly harder for agencies to keep pace with the private sector."
---

The government's new FedRAMP requirements — intended to make it easier for federal agencies to make the jump to the cloud — actually make it significantly harder for agencies to keep pace with the private sector, let alone catch up. Designed as a centralized approval process for cloud service providers seeking to do business with the federal government, in practice, FedRAMP instead erects a walled garden around _(always)_ government contractors, and dredges a steep moat of bureaucracy to keep innovative and low-cost solutions as inaccessible to government agencies as possible.

Put simply, *FedRAMP is GovSpeak for "no" at a time when we need to make it easier to say "yes"*.

Everywhere you look, anyone talking about Federal IT reform — from CIOs to civic hackers — is saying one of two things:

1. The federal government needs to be more agile; to work more like a startup; hashtag innovate!
2. We can't continue to rely on the same short list of traditional beltway insiders to get there

### How we got here

In the olden days (three years ago in government years), any time an agency wanted to stand up a new application in their data center, the agency would have to spend about six months and around $150,000[^cost] going through a FISMA certification framework that included things like assessing the degree to which Something Bad (TM) happening would affect the agencies day-to-day operations (e.g., the IRS taxpayer database getting hacked would be "high", the FCC's kidz zone being inaccessible would be "low").

As agencies began spinning up servers in datacenters they didn't own ("the cloud"), the same process continued to apply. Level headed IT innovators quickly realized that multiple agencies were certifying the same datacenter multiple times, but each agency was individually required to go through that lengthy process over again. Enter FedRAMP:

### The Good

FedRAMP creates a centralized mechanism whereby, if a cloud hosting environment has already been evaluated by one agency, other agencies can rely on that certification. That's great for [things like](http://cloud.cio.gov/fedramp/cloud-systems) Amazon Web Services, which typically have contracts in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, across what I'd suspect to be hundreds of agencies.

### Where things went off the rails

The problem is that FedRAMP is both exclusive - *everything must be FedRAMP* and over-inclusive  - *everything is FedRAMP*. Most sources look to [NIST's definition of the cloud](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf) to determine FedRAMP's scope:

> Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that  can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.

On-demand infrastructure like Amazon or Microsoft's web hosting services, along with services targeted directly at government (e.g., CGI Federal or Lockheed Martin's cloud platform) fit squarely within that definition. These government contractors have the potential for millions of dollars in federal spending annually, and can easily offset the cost of certification and compliance for their purpose-built offerings. It's logical (and efficient) to make such offerings jump though a centralized hoop before they are eligible for federal contracts.

### The entire internet as an edge case

But what about the rest of the internet? The part not purpose-build for government? The things consumers use on a daily basis and ask "why can't government just use X"? You know, the part we want government to be able to more easily use? The General Services Administration (the agency that oversees FedRAMP) has been spending the past few years [quietly amassing just such a list of cloud-based services approved for government use](http://www.digitalgov.gov/resources/negotiated-terms-of-service-agreements/). This includes things we'd largely assume the government should be able to use to engage with citizens — things like Facebook, Twitter, or yes, even Myspace — to services that the government can use for free or at a negligible cost to work smarter — things like WordPress.com/Tumblr, Socrata, and yes, even GitHub.

The problem is — under GSA's own logic — these services are now *verboten*, and are likely to remain that way for the foreseeable future, unless FedRAMP suddenly says otherwise.

### Policies that scale on demand

Like many well-intentioned government efforts, in centralizing the authorization of cloud service providers the FedRAMP team scaled up the batch size, but forgot to also scale it down, or at least carve out an exception where it doesn't make economic sense, essentially raising the barrier to entry for non-insiders, the same non-insiders which we want the to government to use to break out of its old ways.

Take GitHub as a use case[^disclaimer]. We're a small business that the bulk of technology companies, large and small, rely on to collaborate on software source code. Government is no exception. About X US government organizations use GitHub, and more than 5,000 US government employees already use GitHub. The problem is, most of that use is either free (a great thing for tax payers), or a negligible cost for government agencies. A typical government agency might spend $300 a year with us, several powers less than I suspect the agency spends on paperclips each year.

For us to go through the FedRAMP process, we'd be forced to invest upwards of half a million dollars up front[^estimate], and seriously disrupt our internal operations in perpetuity. If every federal agency (A) joined GitHub the day we became certified, (B) upgraded their account to our highest listed service level, and (C) never downgraded, we might *break even* in a few years. Needless to say, FedRAMP isn't in our future.

### "Secure"

Is GitHub secure? of course. At least, we're secure enough for ____. We use things not even yet on government's requirements radar like two-factor authentication and ____. Is Facebook or Flickr? Probably more so than most government systems. The problem is that while we meet industry-standard security requirements, we don't meet *government* security requirements, which in some cases, are less secure.

Looking through [FedRAMP's 24 page checklist of requirements](#), take requirement AC-7(a) and (b) as an example. We've all seen this before. Login too many times with the wrong password, and you're prevented from logging in for a set period of time. It prevents what's called a brute force attack, and is standard on everything from your iPhone to your email. FedRAMP calls for no more than three attempts in fifteen minutes followed by a thirty minute timeout. We don't meet that. Why? because GitHub looks at factors beyond just time, such as geography (are you logging in from China when you normally log in from DC?) and brute-force attacks across multiple accounts (are you trying the same password across every account in an organization?).

### The "sniff" test

For most private sector technologists, the proposal that Facebook, Tumblr, or GitHub constitute a "cloud service provider" simply doesn't pass the "sniff" test. Yet [`cloud.cio.gov/`](http://cloud.cio.gov/), FedRAMP's official site, [decrees that all of the following is "cloud"](http://cloud.cio.gov/topics/software-service-saas), so long as it resides out side of the agency's HQ:

* Blogging
* Online surveys
* Social networking
* Information and knowledge sharing
* Online communications
* Collaboration
* Productivity

The FedRAMP site even has [a section dedicated to the "social media cloud"](http://cloud.cio.gov/topics/social-media), to discuss things like "blogging", "bookmarking", "displaying multimedia", and "RSS" feeds.

### Federal procurement made the same mistake

Don't get me wrong. Government agencies shouldn't trust fly-by-night websites. Cloud services shouldn't just apply the "it fell off the back of a truck" level of service, but common sense tells us the same standard can't apply to both standing up a top-secret datacenter and standing up a public-facing Facebook page, not to mention dragging private sector firms that the government would like to use through arbitrary federal processes, often at a loss.

Federal procurement has this same fatal flaw. The same multi-billion dollar process used to procure tanks and battle ships is also used to get access to sub-thousand dollar industry standard services — a rounding error in any agency's budget.

### No as the default

The largest difference, by far, between the private sector and government, is that whereas in silicon valley the default is "that's awesome", in government, the default is "no". Can your agency use "X" service? It's not that you can't do something, it's that you don't have a URL that says you can. And that's the problem.

While I'd love for FedRAMP to come out and give agencies a URL that says "you can use X", that's likely not going to happen in the foreseeable future. Instead [don't take no from someone not empowered to say yes](#). Can that same logic be used to tell you not to use Facebook? Twitter? Tumblr? (or realy, anything on the internet?)

Chances are, 




[^cost]: Based solely on my not-remotely-scientific experience standing up several apps at several federal agencies.

[^estimate]: Per consultation by a FedRAMP certified third-party accrediting organizations. We tried, really, we did.

[^disclaimer]: As a reminder, I lead [GitHub's government team](https://government.githb.com), but [speak for myself](/fine-print).
