---
title: Why open source
description: Open source is awesome. There are many reasons why you might consider consuming, publishing, collaborating on, or supporting open source. Here's a few.
---

Open source is awesome. There are many reasons why you might consider consuming, publishing, collaborating on, or supporting open source. Here's a few:

### Microeconomic

Open source is in your best interest, whether you're an individual, a corporation, a small business, a non-profit, or a government agency:

* **Shift developers from low-value work to high-value work** - We like to say in open source that *all the easy problems have already been solved*. Blogging, content management, and operating systems are all problems with established (and mainstream) open source solutions, to name a few. While your developers could spend their time reinventing wheels that the open source community have already perfected, it's far preferable to use the worlds best wheel, especially when that wheel comes at no cost to you. This frees developers up to work on yet-unsolved challenges, the types of challenges that are unique to and add value to your organization's mission. Why not stand on the shoulders of technology giants?

* **Lower total cost of ownership** (TCO) - Using open source software yields a lower total cost of ownership when compared to closed source and proprietary alternatives. Adopting open source software generally has a lower up-front cost, and shifts the cost center from licensing (an operating expense) to customization and implementation (a capital expense). Additional costs like maintenance and support are sunk costs. You're going to be paying for both regardless of if the software is open or closed source (the cost often being baked into the license). What makes open source unique is that your not paying for the right to use the underlying intellectual property.

* [**Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linus%27s_Law) (Linus's Law) - Empirically, open source software tends to be better quality software. When you write closed source software, the only developers that can potentially detect, diagnose, triage, and resolve software bugs are those that happen to be employed by the company that publishes the software (or more likely, the contractor they pay to build it). Open source provides three advantages: first, you have the opportunity to tap the knowledge of the world's best developers, not just those on one organization's payroll. Second, the number of potentially contributing developers and thus the potential knowledge pool is orders of magnitude larger. Finally, open source software gets adapted to variety of use cases, not just the one the publisher originally intended, surfacing bugs and edge cases much more rapidly than traditional, predictive QA processes.

* [**Modern software development practices**] (http://ben.balter.com/2015/09/21/open-source-behind-the-firewall/) - Open source software is more than simply "published" code. You'd be hard-pressed to find an open source project that follows outdated waterfall or rigid command-and-contorl development philosophies, still common in many large organizations. Open source projects necessitate modern software development workflows. These workflows are electronic (meaning process is naturally captured and exposed), asynchronous (meaning decisions are time and location agnostic), and lock-free (meaning contributors can rapidly experiment without prior approval). These three workflow characteristics means more rapid development cycles and more frequent releases without sacraficing quality.

* **Patch on your own schedule** - So long as software is written by humans, bugs and security vulnerabilities are inevitable. When a vulnerability is discovered in a proprietary software project, you have to wait for the workday to begin in the company's timezone, for meetings to be held, tasks assigned, and code written, all before G&A teams like legal, sales, and marketing have to coordinate how to get the fix into the next regularly-scheduled release. For proprietary software bugs and vulnerabilities affect the bottom line, and thus there's a disincentive to make their details widely publicized. With open source, not only can leaner, more agile, non-profit-oriented organization move faster, since you have access to the source code, you can often apply fixes, both large and small, at your own convenience, not the publishing organization's.

GitHub Cofounder Tom Preston-Werner lays out some additional arguments in his post [Open Source (Almost) Everything](http://tom.preston-werner.com/2011/11/22/open-source-everything.html):

* **Force multiplier** - Open source is a force multiplier for your developers. This happens in two ways: First, when communities form around shared challenges, the diversity of ideas that naturally emerges surfaces better solutions than if the marketplace of ideas was limited to just your organization, meaning developers are working smarter. Second, exposing the problem space to other interested organizations provides additional human capital to tackle your challenge, meaning the solution has more developer hours thrown at it, at no additional cost to you.

* **Modular** - Open source projects tend to be more modularly architected, improving both the flexibility, and the robustness of the code. When you're building software for a single use case, you're able to take some technical short cuts. The problem comes when you'd like to use that software in a different use case, or when your requirements change. Open source, by its nature, is built for a variety of use cases, environments, and users. This means more options (rather than hard coding defaults for a particular use), and a tendency to encourage more modularity (rather than assuing a one-size-fits-all featureset), resulting in greater flexibility and lower customization costs in the long run.

* **Reduce duplication of effort** - You should focus on your core competency. What makes you unique or gives you an advantage? Everything else is the work everyone else is also doing, or put another way, the work you need to do so that you can do the work that you want to do. It doesn't have to be that way. Open source reduces duplication of efforts, both within an organization and across organizations, by allowing for individual components to be shared. Coca-Cola's secret sauce is the formula for its syrup, not its ability publish blog posts or post press releases. Using an open source CMS, or sharing their built-in-house blog components with the world, doesn't make Pepsi taste any better.

* **Upstream improvements** - If you consume open source software, it's in your best interest to contribute back. Contributions can be in the form of reporting bugs, or even submitting proposed fixes. Since software is written by humans, it's highly unlikely to be perfect, and even if so, likely doesn't satisfy every use case. Rather than forking the project and implementing changes into your own version, submitting bug reports and improvements upstream allows you to more easily benefit from the subsequent fixes and improvements submitted by others.

* **Great advertising** - Maintainers of successful open source projects are often seen as industry leaders, providing themselves with the ability to shape the conversation around a particular software problem and associating their brand with the preferred solution. GitHub is known for creating [Hubot](https://hubot.github.io). 37 Signals is known for creating Ruby on Rails.

* **Attract talent** - Developers want to work on yet-unsolved problems. Open source allows you to showcase to the developer community, the interesting challenges you face, and how you think about solving them. Open source developers can casually contribute to projects, to learn how you work, and what it's like developing software for a particular set of challenges. If they like what they see, there's a much better chance that they'll apply for a job, than if your organization was a black box when it comes to what it's like to work there.

* **Best technical interview possible** - Technical interviews traditionally involve working on a simulated problem that can be tackled in a set amount of time. Such simulations, by definition, aren't real world use cases, nor do they show what looking with an applicant would be like. Open source provides visibility into both how a candidate solves problems, and how they work with others. You can hire much more confidently if, for the past six months, the candidate has been contributing to the project you want them work on, and you like their work.

* **Retain talent** - ???

### Macroeconomic

By combining and augmenting parallel or related efforts, open source makes a society more efficient at producing higher quality software:

* **Efficiency** - Many of the microeconomic arguments above, in the aggregate, have a macroeconomic impact. When firms work more efficiently, the economy produces more. If you believe that all the easy problems have already been solved, then on a macroeconomic level, open source allows you to move firms from lower-level work to higher level, yet-unsolved challenges. The results of this higher level work tends to be disruptive, rather than iterative, creating the churn that motivates the economy. If every technology company must devote a few years solving the same 5-10 problems, that delay's the company's ability to be productive.

* **Stand on the shoulders of giants** - Today, innovative technology, the type of technology that improves quality of life, isn't created in a vacuum. Even closed source technology, from the cell phone in your pocket to the car you drive to the Fortune 500 company that produced them, rely heavily on open source (don't believe me? Take a look at your phone's "about" page). Just as algebra and trigonometry being unencumbered by private sector copyright gives gave to everything from calculus to quantum physics, open source allows developers to take already-solved problems as a given, to rely on the knowledge of experts beyond their own domain of expertise, and unlocks their potential to create create new things otherwise not possible.

* **Fuel the marketplace of ideas** - Software is nothing more than technical knowledge. There was once a time when alchemists wouldn't share the results of their work. Each had to learn the hard way the results of drinking lead on the human body. When those alchemists began sharing their work, we began calling them scientists, and the scientific revolution was born. The same is true of mathematics, literature, and computer software. Two developers working individually may come up with two solutions to a given problem, but through dialog and collaboration, each bringing their own knowledge and experience, may discover three, five, or ten solutions to the same problem.

### Moral

The formal name for open source is free/libre open source software. As such, open source motivations have a strong moral component:

* **Free as in speech, not as in beer** - Open source software is not without cost. When open source software is called "free", it is a reference to the rights the software consumers receive, not the cost that they must pay. ???????

* **Obligation to give back** - Open source is the give-a-penny-take-a-penny jar of software. If you consume open source, be it a server, a desktop publishing application, or a software library, you have an obligation to give back to the community. After all, without the contribution of others, the micro- and macroeconomic arguments would fall short, and open source would cease to exist.

* **Teching the next generation** - Many of the industry's most prominent engineers today cut their teeth by learning from open source. When software's underlying code is made available for inspection, consumers can learn how their favorite software works, and computer science courses can analyze how the industry's cutting edge software is built. This goes a long way to train the next generation of software engineers.

### Transparency

Open source allows for greater transparency of process, whether that's the transparency necessary to check a government action or the quasi-governmental function of a private company's software.

* **Showing your work** - As the government increasingly relies on technology to regulate industries and delver citizen services, being able to see the underlying algorithms and processes are essential to checking the government's work. If a closed-source software package is used to calculate my taxes or allocate broadcast frequencies, how do I know that it's fair and accurate? Whereas human processes can't be copyrighted, when close source, such processes become a black box, minimizing the potential for a citizen counterbalance.

* **Positions of public trust** - As the software produced by private corporations are increasingly placed in positions of public trust, the transparency obligation extends into the private sector as well. Did the voting machine accurately count my vote? When given a lose-lose choice, does the self-driving car conform to community norms? For example, if a closed-source software package is used to compare DNA at a crime scene, unlike a medical expert who can be cross examined, that proprietary algorithm is shielded from scrutiny by copyright (or patent) law. Open source, at least partial open source of particular components will become essential as private companies automate quasi-government functions.

### Participatory

Open source affords software stakeholders, both technical and non-technical, the opportunity to shape any given software development project:

* **Direct democracy** - True direct democracy (where every citizen votes on every issue) isn't tenable given the size of most democracies. Nor have citizen been able to participate directly in most issues, due to technical constraints. Open source changes that by allowing software stakeholders to participate directly in the software development process (as software is increasingly relied on to codify regulatory and service-delivery preferences and norms). Think the process of buying health care is confusing? Open an issue. Believe the government should use more open source, submit a pull request. The White House is already doing this for many IT-centric policies like the Digital Services Playbook, HTTPS, and open data policies.

* **Customer feedback** - Open source empowers consumers to have a combined, powerful voice in the private sector development process. Think of it like Yelp for software. Without Yelp, a restaurants is free to upset a single customer. At most, they could dissuadee 5-10 potential patrons. In a post-Yelp world, customers read the reviews of strangers before they choose where to go. Open source amplifies the voice of software consumers within te consumer-publisher relationsihp. Not to mention, the feedback the private company recieves can go towards better informing product decisions and improve the overall product. Open source gives companies a direct line to their most passionate customers.

There are many reasons why you should prefer consuming, publishing, collaborating on, and supporting open source. Whatever your reason for, it's clear open source isn't the next big thing, it's already here.
