---
title: The seven habits of highly effective GitHubbers
description:
---

### 1. Professional, but not formal

There's a difference between being professional and being formal. Professionalism is about mastery in one's craft. Professionals are efficient. They're methodical. They're systematic. They're organized. Professionals cary out the task at hand without being distracted by personal concerns. Formality is about strict adherence to rule and convention. Formalism is about stiffness. About being overly concerned with ceremony over substance. About a focus on outward appearance over actually shipping. You can be professional without being formal. When you get a pull request, you can respond cordially and display technical prowess, without beginning your respond "Dear sir, I am in receipt of your pull request dated 2nd of November, 2016...". You can use emoji, animated GIFs, and a more human tone to express an idea while still maintaining focus on the job to be done.

### 2. If you see something, say something

They say in software development, that [the hardest part is finding the problem, not solving it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linus%27s_Law). At GitHub we have a strong tradition of "staff shipping" features for a day, a week, even a few months to get a better sense of how the feature performs within the context of a user's workflow, not to mention, [we use the product day in and day out](http://ben.balter.com/2016/08/22/ten-ways-to-make-a-product-great/#drink-your-own-champagne), so that we can be among the first to notice when something's awry. Whether it's a staff-only feature, or a feature that's been baked into the product for years, we'd much rather a fellow GitHubber find (and report) the problem, rather than subjecting a user to the suboptimal experience. [Issues are cheap](http://ben.balter.com/2014/11/06/rules-of-communicating-at-github/#nobody-gets-fired-for-delbuying-ibmdel-opening-an-issue) and are easily closed if not in order. But you can take that idea a step further: [Borrowing a page from the Boy Scouts handbook](http://programmer.97things.oreilly.com/wiki/index.php/The_Boy_Scout_Rule), when implementing a new feature, always leave the code better than you found it, regardless of who originally made the mess.

### 3. Always be willing to help (but know when to say "no")

One of the things I first noticed when I joined GitHub was that my fellow Hubbers were always willing to help. I could jump into any channel, née chatroom (we use chat for just about anything), ask a question about a topic with which I was unfamiliar, and within seconds, several Hubbers would drop what they were doing to help, not just to explain how, but to walk me through the process. Later, I recognized a long-standing tradition of over-documenting as you worked, to help future generations of Hubbers continue your efforts. And that was the rule, not the exception. We're all experts at something: a part of the codebase, a process, a particular subject matter, or that thing that you experienced last week. Effective Hubbers take the time to share their knowledge to ensure other Hubbers can be effective as well.

"Always be willing to help" is a bit of an overstatement. Effective Hubbers also know when to say "no" to a request. At a certain point you'll realize that you are presented with more opportunities than you have time to act on. That means that you have to prioritize which asks have the highest potential impact, and decline the rest accordingly. You quickly learn that Saying "no" to the lower-impact task allows you to prioritize, and thus have a higher impact on other tasks.

### 4. Curiosity and self-improvement

Curiosity is a core component of [the hacker way](http://ben.balter.com/2013/02/04/what-is-a-hacker/#the-hacker-way). For some, there’s a constant intellectual itch just begging to be scratched, be it with code, with policy, or with systems and process. For these people, the world is full of problems just waiting to be solved. Just as athletes seek delight in pushing their bodies past their physical limits, hackers seek the thrill of pushing themselves (and their tools) beyond what is known, what is solved, and what is possible.

At GitHub, there's a strong history of rewarding that curiosity. Most visibly, we have a reading stipend, whereby GitHubbers are encouraged to constantly refine their craft (and learn new ones). Beyond that, there's a sense that if you see something you don't know or understand, you can, and should take the time to understand it. That could be a new part of the application or an entirely new language or technology. The worst thing you can do, when you experience something unknown is to give up or consider yourself blocked.

### 5. Contribute to the appreciation economy

GitHub operates on an appreciation economy. What I mean by that, is that appreciation (in the emotional sense) is the currency upon which GitHub runs. Heavily influenced by the ideas of [Rework](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B002MUAJ2A/?tag=benbalter-20), the idea being that in many cases, public recognition is a more appropriate response than a monetary reward. For a while, that took the form of company-wide "shoutout" every week (e.g., "shoutout to Ben for taking the time to help me learn X"), but that didn't scale as the company grew. Today, that takes the form of a `.sparkles` ChatOps command, posts to our internal Team blog, and a culture of giving credit where credit is due, either on an in-progress issue, or directly to managers after the fact.

### 6. Ship early, ship often

If there's one phrase that epitomizes successful engineers at GitHub, it's "don't let perfect be the enemy of good". We make liberal use of what we call "feature flags", essentially a line of code that lets us ship features to a team, to all staff, or to a subset of users with the click of a button. Almost without exception, as a new feature is being developed, it's exposed to the team for early feedback. After a round (or several) of improvements, its shipped to staff for further tire-kicking, and if things goes well, it's slowly rolled out to users. Lots of ideas don't make it past the PR stage, past the team ship stage, or even the staff ship phase, but it's far preferable to learn that something isn't a good fit before it hits master than it is once users have begin relying on it. [Surface work early for feedback](http://ben.balter.com/2014/11/06/rules-of-communicating-at-github/#surface-work-early-for-feedback), and get small increments of features in hands of users as quickly as possible. In a single buzzword, *iterate*.

### 7. Honesty, integrity, authenticity

All throughout GitHub lore we have phrases like "speak like a human" or "when in doubt, be classy". Granted no one's always perfect, these are more than mere buzzwords. Internally, there's a strong sense that "talk is cheap" and that "action speaks louder than words". It's one thing to say you'll be transparent, it's another thing to work in the open. Successful GitHubbers consistently do what they say they'll do. They're also willing to work past the their own self-consciousness to have awkward conversations, be they positive or negative. Everyone's better when things are in the open. Finally, when things aren't great, they don't gloss over the not-so-great, or put on a fake face.
