---
title: API-first product management
description:
---

"API-first" architectures have been around [for some time now](https://apievangelist.com/2014/08/11/what-is-an-api-first-strategy-adding-some-dimensions-to-this-new-question/). API-first is an engineering approach that suggests building and exposing the programmatic interfaces to access your product's underlying logic before building the human interface (web site, mobile app, etc.), rather than the other way around, as is often the case. 

For example, if you're building a blog, instead of starting by creating the web-based text area to write a new post, and then moving down the stack to wire up the necessary logic to save the user's input and make that view work, you'd start by exposing an endpoint to save arbitrary user input, and then move on to endpoints to get a listing of posts, a single post, etc., all in a machine-readable format. In some ways you can think about it as breadth first versus depth first.

API-first has countless benefits from an engineering perspective in terms of interoperability, resilience, and serviced-oriented architecture, but I wanted to focus on the product benefits, which are often overlooked.

When product managers describe features, we often talk in terms of deliverables, or at least the surface area of the user experience, which may be reduced to "a button to do X" or "a dropdown to choose Y". While you may be eager to get such functionality into the hands of users and to close out the user story, for many features, it may make sense to expose the underlying logic to users first, before even thinking about the user interface:

* **APIs reduce project risk**. User experience is hard. Rather than field testing the underlying logic *and* the user interface simultaneously (or allowing one to be blocked on the other), exposing APIs first allows you to ship a subset of the overall feature early on and to coarse correct as necessary, reducing risk through smaller, iterative changes. By the time you go-to-market with the user-interface, you can do so confidently knowing the code paths have been thoroughly tested.
* **APIs allow you to validate assumptions**. APIs allow you to get functionality into users' hands and see how they use it, and because of the transactional nature of APIs, they make collecting metrics (to inform future product decisions) really easy. You could spend months designing the perfect interface, or you could learn early on which features, workflows, or interactions are most valuable to users and concentrate your efforts there. You'd be surprised how often what you think a user wants turns out to be wrong.
* **APIs serve as *de facto* product specs**. Because APIs are typically both complete and unchanging, APIs require you to enumerate data models and think through through edge cases early on. 
* **API consumers are extremely critical**. Should the result have been returned as `1` instead of `'1'` or `null` instead of `""`? Is the logic case sensitive? Does unexpected input cause things to break? You can spend a good deal of time 


* Nobody notices
* More tollerant of change